The transport sector stands for about a quarter of the European
greenhouse gas emissions, of which road transport contributes about 70
percent (European Commission, 2018). To reach the climate goals set by
2050, it is thus an urgent need for policymakers in Europe to understand
more about how a transition towards a fossil-free transport sector can be
achieved. Researchers have in recent years directed massive interests
towards reducing the use of non-sustainable transport alternatives,
mainly fossil-fuelled cars, see e.g. Eriksson et al. (2008), Kim et al.
(2017), Masoumi (2019), Ababio-Donkor et al. (2020), and Danielis
et al. (2022). A majority of this research is however focused on studying
motives for transport choices when commuting to work/school, while
considerably less is focused on transport to leisure activities.
Since transport for other purposes than work or study constitute a
substantial share of the total transported kilometres – in Sweden, the
number of kilometres transported by car for leisure purposes is even
higher than the equivalent for commuting (Transport Analysis, 2017) –
it is important also to address leisure travels. Leisure travels are, how-
ever, more irregular compared to commuting to work, as they often vary
substantially concerning both purpose and time. Clearly, it is more feasible to try to change recurring travel behaviour between constant
locations and for the same travel purpose, than to affect more irregular
and multipurpose travelling behaviour. Nevertheless, the amount of
greenhouse gas emissions is related to the total length of fossil-fuelled
kilometres rather than to the number of routes, and it will not be suf-
ficient to reduce carbon emissions stemming only from commuting.
Improved knowledge about what factors that are important for car use to
leisure activities is thus needed.
This study aims to contribute with such knowledge. The purpose is to
analyse what factors that explain differences in car use to different types
of leisure activities. We focus on everyday leisure travelling, and more
specifically on activity-based travel demand where we separate between
travelling to maintenance activities and discretionary activities (see e.g.
Castiglione et al., 2015; Loa et al., 2021). Maintenance activities (e.g.
grocery shopping and visits to healthcare centres) are directed to meet
basic human needs while discretionary activities are more focused on
psychological needs (e.g. visiting friends/family, culture, sports, enter-
tainment) (Chen and Mokhtarian, 2006). We thus recognize that there
are differences between travelling to more repetitive leisure activities
(maintenance activities) compared to discretionary activities that are
less repetitive and destinations can be less familiar (Anable, 2002;Case Studies on Transport Policy 14 (2023) 101090
2Schlich et al., 2004; Dharmowijoyo et al., 2018; Holden and Linnerud,
2011), and are interested in analysing differences in explanatory factors
for car use depending on leisure trip purposes. Moreover, leisure trips
are often jointly decided and dependent on other individuals, such as
other family members (Dugundji et al., 2008; Ohnmacht et al. 2009;
Str¨omblad et al. 2022), and to account for this we include both driving in
own car and co-riding in our definition of car use.
Differences in infrastructure like the built environment and public
transport has been found to explain differences in transport mode
choices (Javaid et al., 2020). In addition to the importance of differences
in conditions for transports between different types of residential areas
(centralised vs. urban) we focus also on the impact of differences be-
tween municipalities with fundamentally different conditions for
transport. A survey was distributed to residents in five municipalities in
Sweden, classified as metropolitan, urban or rural, which represent our
case studies. The main motivation for these cases is that Sweden is, with
the exception of a few metropolitan regions, a sparsely populated
country with significant variation in transport conditions. This implies
specific challenges for the transport sector, as both the potential and the
challenges for a transition to fossil-free transports vary significantly. In
particular, in many rural municipalities public transport is in principle
non-existing and car use is therefore the only plausible option for longer difficult to affect compared to leisure trips that meet basic needs, which
stresses that the motives for transport choices likely differ depending on
the type of trip. In addition, individual attitudes as well as differences in
resources and accessibility are also expected to affect differences in car
use.
The decision whether to use car or not can also be affected by a desire
to act as a socially responsible person. Here, we follow Nyborg et al.
(2006), and include an individual’s perceived personal responsibility to
contribute to a sustainable transport sector as part of the process of
deciding transport mode to leisure activities. We hypothesise that people
that acknowledge a personal responsibility to use sustainable transport
modes drive less to leisure activities than those who do not feel this
responsibility. This approach is based on previous research stressing the
importance of personal attitudes and norms for environmental behav-
iour and transport mode choices (Hunecke et al., 2001; Nyborg et al.,
2006; Ababio-Donkor et al., 2020; Str¨omblad et al., 2022, to mention a
few). To test whether acknowledging a personal responsibility to
contribute to a sustainable transport sector affects car use, and poten-
tially is endogenously determined to this behaviour, we estimate
recursive bivariate regression models. The factors expected to be related
to acknowledging a personal responsibility are described in section 2.2
below.
Individual differences in car use can however also be the result of
cognitive processes that to some extent are unconscious (Gardner and
Abraham, 2008; Lanzini and Kahn, 2017), for instance by habitual
behaviour (Bamberg et al., 2003; Eriksson et al., 2008; Verplanken et al.,
2008; Pedersen et al., 2012; Thidell et al., 2012). Habitual driving is one
example of bounded rationality; without reflecting much on the choice,
people continue to do what they usually do. Ramos et al. (2020) found
that habits (operationalised through a self-reported driving habit scale)
are a predictor for car use also in non-commuting trips. Moreover,
commuting by car has been found to increase the likelihood of using car
also for other purposes (Sharmeen and Timmermans, 2014; Rubin et al.,
2014). In this study, we are interested to analyse if those that regularly
use car when commuting, and thus have a habit of using car for this
purpose, more often use car also for leisure purposes.
The availability and quality of alternative transport modes differ
across municipalities, and therefore the comfort as well as time and
monetary costs also vary locally and affect thus transport patterns.
Research on the relationship between the built environment and travel
behaviour is extensive, especially in the fields of urban planning and
transportation, see Crane, 2000; Handy et al., 2005; Ewing and Cervero,
2010, to mention a few. It has been found that actively reducing hinders
to public or active transports, such as fast pathways and land use plan-
ning, may impact car use (Ye and Titheridge, 2017). However, previous
studies often focus on transport mode choices in geographically defined
and uniform areas, such as urban or suburban areas (Eriksson and For-
ward, 2011; Kl¨ockner and Friedrichsmeier, 2011; Muro-Rodriguez et al.,
2017), where the conditions for car use compared to e.g. public trans-
port is similar. In some small rural municipalities, public transport is
however in principle non-existent, and cars may often be the only
plausible option. This study analyses private car use in rural, urban, and
metropolitan contexts. However, also in more urban municipalities
there are areas outside of the central parts that are more sparsely
populated, where the availability of alternatives to car use is often
restricted, which is also controlled for. It is expected that those who live
in rural municipalities, and in more sparsely populated areas, use cars
more often for leisure activities.
The type of car that the household owns can also affect the choice to
drive. Previous research finds that so-called rebound effects may arise, e.
g., individuals with electric cars may drive more as the marginal cost for
driving is lower (no petrol/gasoline needed) and since they may feel that
driving is less harmful to the environment (see, e.g. Br¨annlund et al.,
2007; Dimitropoulos et al., 2017; Craglia and Cullen, 2020). We
examine this empirically by controlling for access to a fossil-free car.
According to previous research, individual differences in
distance travels.
It is further possible that differences in the extent to which people
acknowledge a personal responsibility to contribute to a sustainable
transport sector affect car use to leisure activities. The hypothesis is that
car use is negatively related to perceptions that an individual has a
personal responsibility to contribute to a more sustainable transport
sector, among other factors. The analysis is based on survey responses
from 1024 individuals with access to car in the household, collected
from a web panel in May 2019.1 Given the possible relationship between
car use and beliefs about personal responsibility, we apply recursive
bivariate probit models. We also control for the impact of other factors
for car use, e.g., type of area of residence, and sociodemographic char-
acteristics, which previous research have identified as relevant (Ner-
hagen, 2003; Hollevoet et al., 2011; Ettema, and Zwartbol, 2013; Muro-
Rodrígues et al., 2017; Sovacool et al., 2018; Susilo et al., 2019; Correia
et al., 2019; Hoerler et al., 2020).
We add to the literature by focusing on different types of leisure
travels, but also by considering differences in the conditions for trans-
port depending on type of municipality, in addition to the more studied
impacts related to population density in general. This knowledge is
important for local, regional and national policy makers when they
design and implement policies for a fossil-free transport sector, not least
as the rural vs. urban tension that has become increasingly visible in
Sweden is present between inhabitants in the rural, often inland, mu-
nicipalities and the more urbanised metropolitan areas along the coasts.
In this debate, access to car and costs for car use is central.
2. Determinants of car use and personal responsibility
2.1. Factors related to private car use
The point of departure for the analysis is that individuals are
assumed to choose car if it generates the highest expected utility (or
lowest expected disutility), which is likely affected by which type of
leisure activity that create demand for transport (Dekker et al., 2014).
Transports to activities providing necessities (such as grocery shopping)
are generally more of a routine, while transports to activities providing
high expected satisfaction for the individual (such as visiting friends/
family, culture, sports, entertainment) might be considered differently
(Anable, 2002; Schlich et al., 2004; Dharmowijoyo et al., 2018). Holden
and Linnerud (2011) also found that discretionary leisure trips are more sociodemographic factors, e.g., age, gender, education, and family sit-
uation, may also affect transport behaviour (Nerhagen, 2003; Hollevoet
et al., 2011; Ettema and Zwartbol, 2013; Muro-Rodrígues et al., 2017;
Sovacool et al., 2018; Correia et al., 2019; Susilo et al., 2019; Hoerler
et al., 2020). Younger individuals have for instance been shown to be
less prone to use cars than older people, and households with higher
incomes use private cars more often than households with lower in-
comes (Thidell et al., 2012; Ramos et al., 2020). For older generations,
Susilo et al. (2019) found that men drive more than females, but for
younger generations, this gender gap seems to be diminishing. Another
interesting finding related to gender differences identified by Sovacool
et al. (2018) is that females drive shorter distances. The effect of gender
on car use is thus ambiguous, according to previous research. Cirillo and
Axhausen (2006) found that households with children more often use
private car when travelling. We examine this and control for socio-
demographic differences stemming from age, income, gender, house-
hold composition. Given that our sample is somewhat restricted
regarding income, since it includes only respondents with access to
private cars, we do however not expect income to be an important factor
for car use.
2.2. Factors related to personal responsibility
As described above, we analyse what factors that are related to the
probability that an individual state that she or he feel a personal re-
sponsibility to contribute to a more sustainable transport sector.
Following Brekke et al. (2003) we assume that problem awareness is
positively related to acknowledging a personal responsibility. Those
stating in the survey that they are concerned about climate change are
considered to be problem aware and more likely to acknowledge a
personal responsibility than people less concerned about climate
change. As well, people may have preferences for social approval (Rege,
2002) which can motivate participation in collective actions (G¨achter
and Fehr, 1999). In this context, we operationalise preferences for social
expectations as those agreeing that friends and family think it is
important to contribute to a sustainable transport sector, and examine
whether there is any relationship between car use and social
expectations.
Although we do not have any a priori expectations about whether the
probability to acknowledge a personal responsibility to contribute to a
more sustainable transport sector differs for urban and rural residents,
we examine this in the empirical part below. While the relationship
between gender and transport behaviour is not completely clear, it is
found that women have stronger environmental concerns and behaviour
in general compared to men (Gifford and Nilsson, 2014). It has also been
found that younger people are more concerned for environmental issues
in general than older (Gifford and Nilsson, 2014). Based on these find-
ings, we evaluate whether women and younger respondents are more
prone to acknowledge a personal responsibility within the transport
domain. In addition, we investigate whether the probability to
acknowledge a personal responsibility to contribute to a sustainable
transport sector differs concerning educational or income levels (although the income variation in the sample is somewhat restricted
given that we only include households with access to car).
3. Survey design, data collection, and descriptive statistics
Data is collected through a survey directed to households in five
municipalities in Sweden. The sample represents five municipalities that
were chosen as our cases rather than a random representation of Swe-
den. The main motivation for directing the survey to these municipal-
ities is that we wanted to understand how differences in conditions (e.g.
availability of public transport) between rural, urban and metropolitan
cities affect car use to leisure activities.2 The municipalities were
selected based on their differences regarding sociodemographic, popu-
lation density, infrastructural, and geographic factors. One city is a
growing metropolitan municipality (Stockholm), two are mid-sized
urban municipalities ( ¨Orebro and Luleå), and two are small rural mu-
nicipalities (Gislaved and Arvidsjaur).
The first part of the survey collected socioeconomic and -de-
mographic information. The second part included questions about how
the respondents usually transport themselves to work/school, mainte-
nance activities, and discretionary activities. The development of the
questionnaire was supported by a reference group in which people from
the Swedish EPA and local officials from the selected municipalities
participated. The survey was also pre-tested, in one focus group with
about ten graduate students and in a pilot in a later stage with about 20
individuals with no specific prior knowledge about environmental im-
pacts from the transport sector or transport policies. As a result of these
tests, some of the questions were rephrased, and some questions were
added (mainly as a result of suggestions from the municipal officials).
The survey used a web panel administered by the company Norstat,
collecting a minimum of 200 responses in the five municipalities in May
2019 (almost a year before the covid-19 pandemic affected the transport
sector in Sweden). In the rural municipalities, the number of partici-
pants in the web panel were relatively few, therefore, responses from
these municipalities were supplemented with phone interviews to
randomly selected inhabitants in these municipalities (performed by the
same company).
In total, responses from 1173 individuals (adults older than 17 years)
were collected. Only answers from respondents that actually can make a
choice on whether to use car or not are considered relevant, given the
purpose of the study. After removing the 149 respondents answering
that they do not have access to a car in their household, and thus lacking
the choice to use car, responses from 1024 individuals with access to car
remained.
Table 1 presents selected sample characteristics in comparison with
the population in each type of municipality (metropolitan, urban and
rural) and with the national average (for the pooled sample). Our re-
spondents are slightly older than the average population in the country.
We also note that women are overrepresented in the sample. The level of
education (measured as a percentage with education level above high
school) varies substantially between regions and municipalities, which
is also reflected in our sample. The educational level in the sample is,
however, higher, both compared to the national average and the mu-
nicipality populations.
The metropolitan municipality, Stockholm, has a high population
density and is characterised by well-developed public transport,
congestion, and high parking fees. This is also the area with the highest
average household income in the country. In the urban mid-sized mu-
nicipalities, public transport is less developed than in the metropolitan
area, and the density of the cities often makes active transport a viable
alternative. In the rural municipalities, public transport is scarce, distances are often long and private car use is therefore dominating.
There are thus significant differences regarding the infrastructure for
transport in the included areas in the study.
The variables that have been included in the regressions are defined
in Table 2. We expect leisure travels to often occur and be determined
within households rather than individually. Therefore the dependent
variable car use include both respondents either answering that they
often or always transport themselves alone in the car (i.e., drive themselves), and those answering that they often or always co-ride in a
car (drive and/or ride together with others).3 60 percent of the re-
spondents answer that they always/often use private car for mainte-
nance activities (about two thirds of these are alone in the car and one
third co-ride), while 53 percent state that they do so for discretionary
activities (more than half of these report that they often/always co-ride
in a car). The dependent variables (car use to maintenance respectively
discretionary activities and personal responsibility) are thus binary. For car
use, one indicates that a respondent report that she/he always or often
use car (either alone and/or co-ride) for transport to leisure activities.
Answers were ranging on a five-graded scale between never (1) and
always (5) and those answering 4 and 5 were coded as one.4 The re-
spondents who do not use car always/often to these activities use either
public transport or active transport (walk or bike), or a mixture of all
alternatives.
The personal responsibility variable is defined as those that agreed or
strongly agreed (4 or 5 on a five graded Likert-scale) to the statement
that they feel a personal responsibility to contribute to a sustainable
transport sector. About 33 percent of the respondents were defined as
acknowledging a personal responsibility related to a sustainable trans-
port sector.5
For the car use model, we analyse whether personal responsibility is also use car more often for leisure purposes, we include a variable
denoted habit. In addition, we control for type of municipality and
whether the respondent live in a sparsely populated area. As we want to
examine possible rebound effects, an explanatory variable for non-fossil
fuelled car is included. Relatively few respondents, only about 6 percent,
report that they have access to such a car. Finally, we have included
several sociodemographic variables in the car use model.
The explanatory variables included in the personal responsibility
model are social expectations and problem awareness, i.e. we expect
those with family/friends that think it is important to contribute to a
sustainable transport sector as well as those that worry about climate
change to be more likely to acknowledge such responsibility. We include
dummy variables for type of municipality to also control for any dif-
ferences due to area of residence. The urban (mid-sized) municipalities
are used as a reference category. Finally, sociodemographic variables
are also included in this regression.
4. Model specification
As indicated previously, we assume that car users are utility max-
imisers. We further hypothesise that private car use to leisure activities
can be affected by whether or not the individual feels a personal re-
sponsibility to contribute to a sustainable transport sector. To examine
these relationships, two regression equation models, i.e., car use to lei-
sure activities and personal responsibility, are estimated. As a personal
responsibility to contribute to a sustainable transport sector could be
endogenous to the respondent’s decision to use car for leisure purposes,
we apply recursive bivariate probit models to jointly estimate the
following relationship (Greene, 2003):
y*
1i = β1ix1i + γy2i + u1i (1)
y*
2i = β2ix2i + u2i
where y*
1i and y*
2i represents the binary responses to the two depen-
dent variables for respondent i, and x1i and x2i are the set of factors
affecting the decision to use private cars when travelling to leisure ac-
tivities respectively the personal responsibility to contribute to a sus-
tainable transport sector. This is a specific case of a bivariate probit
model (a recursive model) since the dependent variable y2i (personal
responsibility) appears on the right-hand side of the first equation, whi
related to car use and if this responsibility is endogenous to the use of car
to these activities. To account for this we include the variable for per-
sonal responsibility as an explanatory variable in the recursive model.
To be able to analyse if those that regularly use car when commuting Case Studies on Transport Policy 14 (2023) 101090
6the other dependent variable y1i (car use to leisure activities) does not
appear on the right-hand side of any equation. The β1i and β2i are the
vectors of parameter coefficients, and u1i and u1i are error terms (Greene,
2003). Since y*
1i and y*
2i are binary variables, they take values 0 and 1 as
defined in Table 2.
The details regarding the bivariate normal cumulative distribution
function and its density, as well as the likelihood functions can be found
in Greene (2003). The correlation of the error terms is denoted rho, and a
statistical significance of rho indicates correlated disturbance terms. If
this is the case, the models should be estimated simultaneously and that
the recursive model specification should be preferred over univariate
model specifications. Thus, if rho cannot be separated from zero, the
univariate probit models are preferred. The details for how to calculate
the marginal effects in the recursive bivariate probit model can also be
found in Greene (2003). We have used the software Stata for all
estimations.
5. Results for car use to leisure activities
Below the results from the regressions for car use to both maintenance
and discretionary activities are presented and discussed. Table 3 contains
results regarding car use to maintenance activities, and Table 4 display
the result regarding discretionary activities. Robust standard errors were
used to control for any heteroscedasticity. No high correlations between
the variables were found, and there is thus no evidence of severe
multicollinearity.
Regarding the results in Table 3, we note that rho is statistically
significant, which indicates that acknowledging a personal re-
sponsibility to contribute to a sustainable transport sector endogenously
effects car use to maintenance activities. The negative and statistically
significant coefficient for Personal responsibility in the car use model
further indicate that respondents that acknowledge a personal re-
sponsibility to contribute to a sustainable transport sector, are less prone
to use car when travelling to maintenance activities.
The results for car use further reveal that if a respondent has a habit
of using car when commuting to work or school, the probability in-
creases to use car also for maintenance purposes during leisure. As well,
the probability of car use for maintenance purposes increases if the
respondent lives in a sparsely populated area. Car use is significantly
lower for respondents living in the metropolitan municipality, but there
are no statistically significant differences between respondents living in
rural and urban municipalities. There is no statically significant evi-
dence of any rebound effect, i.e. that households owning a bio fuelled or
electric car drive more than other households. The positive and statis-
tically significant age coefficient indicate that older respondents drive
more for maintenance activities than younger respondents do. This
result is consistent with previous findings (Susilo et al., 2019). It is also
found that respondents with higher education less often use the car to
maintenance activities. Somewhat unexpected is it found that house-
holds with children still living at home do not use the car for mainte-
nance purposes more than households without children, contradictory
to the findings in Cirillo and Axhausen (2006).
The results for whether respondents state that they acknowledge a
personal responsibility for a sustainable transport sector are displayed in
the second column in Table 3. The results show that both social expec-
tations and problem awareness are positively related to personal re-
sponsibility, i.e. respondents that have family/friends that think it is
important to contribute to a sustainable transport sector and re-
spondents that worry about climate change are more likely to
acknowledge such a responsibility. We do not find that the probability to
acknowledge a personal responsibility differs for respondents living in
different types of municipalities. Women more often acknowledge a
personal responsibility to contribute to a sustainable transport sector
than men, which is in line with the findings in Gifford and Nilsson
(2014). Marginal effects for the explanatory variables in the recursive
bivariate probit regression models are displayed in Table A1 in the
Appendix, for the case when respondents both use car when travelling to
maintenance activities and acknowledge a personal responsibility. The
results reveal that personal responsibility has the largest impact on car
use. Car use decreases with almost 30 percent for respondents
acknowledging a personal responsibility. We further note that habits,
being a female, and the municipality or area of residence impact car use
of about the same magnitude.
Table 4 presents the results for car use to discretionary activities, such
as visiting family/friends, cultural events, restaurants, or sports activ-
ities. For these activities rho in the recursive model is not statistically
significant, indicating that acknowledging a personal responsibility to
contribute to a sustainable transport sector is not endogenous for car use
to these types of activities. We therefore estimate a univariate probit
model for car use to discretionary activities.
The results in Table 4 indicate that personal responsibility is statis-
tically significant also for the discretionary model, suggesting that re-
spondents that acknowledge a personal responsibility to contribute to a
sustainable transport sector are less prone to use car when travelling to
these activities. As well, respondents that often or always drive to work
or school are more prone to take the car, indicating that the habit of
commuting by car increases car use also for discretionary purposes.
Respondents living in a metropolitan municipality are less likely to take
the car also for discretionary purposes, which is expected given the
developed public transport in metropolitan areas. In addition, results
reveal that respondents living in rural municipalities use cars more for
discretionary purposes compared to those living in urban municipalities,
which we did not find for maintenance activities. However, living in a
sparsely populated area does not seem to influence car use for discre-
tionary activities. Nor does having a bio fuelled or an electric car
significantly affect car use to discretionary activities, i.e., no evidence of
any so-called rebound effect is found for these activities either.
None of the sociodemographic variables, have any statistically sig-
nificant effect on car use to discretionary activities. The marginal effects
for the univariate probit regression for car use for discretionary purposes
are displayed in Table A2 in the Appendix. The results reveal that the
habit of using the car when travelling to work/school has the largest
impact also on car use to discretionary activities. Which type of mu-
nicipality that the respondent resides in also have a substantial impact
on this choice, even though to a lesser extent than habits. Acknowl-
edging a personal responsibility have a similar impact to car use as
which type of municipality that the respondent lives in.
These results are based on the self reported responses about how
common respondents use car for leisure trips and the alternatives, in
particular between the extremes never and always, can have different
meanings for different respondents. Therefore, we estimated the models
with the dependent variable defined as only respondents reporting that
they always use car (5 on the Likert-scale) set equal to 1.6 While about
60 percent report that they always or often use car for maintenance
purposes, only about 25 percent of these always use car. The corre-
sponding proportions for discretionary travels are 53 percent (always or
often) and 20 (always). Regarding maintenance, the results from the
econometric analysis are similar; there are no differences regarding
preferred model (recursive specification) or impact of personal re-
sponsibility. However, there is some variation in the effect of socio-
economic differences, instead of education, the coefficient for female
is positive and statistically significant. Regarding discretionary travels,
differences were more substantial. The univariate models are still
preferred, but now there is no statistically significant evidence that
differences in acknowledging a personal responsibility are related to car
use. Overall, the results from analysing only those that always (5) use car
is in line with the findings when analysing frequent car users, i.e. both Case Studies on Transport Policy 14 (2023) 101090
7those that often (4) and always (5) use car to these activities.
In sum, the results indicate that feeling a personal responsibility to
contribute to a sustainable transport sector endogenously affects the
choice to use car when travelling to maintenance activities, such as
shopping and visiting the doctor. However, this is not found when
travelling to discretionary activities, such as visiting family/friends,
cultural events, restaurants, or sports activities. However, also for these
types of activities acknowledging a personal responsibility has an impact
on car use (at least in the specification including those that often or
always use car). The type of municipality and area that the respondents
reside in, and the habit of also driving when commuting, do also influ-
ence the use of car to both types of leisure activities. Regarding socio-
demographic variables, the results are less clear and differs between the
models, while age is positively related and educational level is nega-
tively related to car use for maintenance purposes, there are no statis-
tically significant evidence that age or educational level affects car use
for discretionary purposes. We do not find any evidence that having
children in the household affects car use for leisure activities, neither
any rebound effect from access to a non-fossil fueled car. We also tested
(both for discretionary and maintenance activities) whether car use
differ across generations rather than for age continuously (following e.g.
Susilo et al., 2019), but no statistically significant evidence of such
differences was identified when the age variable was separated into
categories. Finally, income has been included as explanatory variable
but since it was not statistically significant in any of the specifications it
was omitted from the models presented here.
6. Discussion and concluding remarks
The transition to a fossil-free transport sector will require that fossil-
fuelled car transports decrease also for leisure purposes, as these travels
constitute a significant share of total transports. This paper aimed to
explain individual differences in car use for travelling to leisure activ-
ities in different municipalities in Sweden. We found that although
about one-third of the respondents’ state that they feel a personal re-
sponsibility to contribute to a sustainable transport sector, more than
half of the respondents use the car (always or often) when travelling to
and from daily leisure activities. We have examined whether differences
in perceptions about personal responsibilities, habits to use car for
commuting, municipal type, area of residence, and sociodemographic
characteristics can explain car use for these leisure travels.
Results show that respondents that perceive that they have a per-
sonal responsibility to contribute to a sustainable transport sector are
less likely to use the car when travelling during leisure, which is
consistent with the findings of, e.g. Ababio-Donkor et al. (2020) and
Hunecke et al. (2001). In fact, personal responsibility has the most
noteworthy and the largest impact on car use for maintenance purposes,
while for travels for discretionary purposes habits to commute by car
and type of residential area have the greatest impact. For travels with
maintenance purposes the results indicate that beliefs about the personal
responsibility is endogenous to the choice to use car (i.e. the recursive
models are preferred over univariate). When it comes to discretionary
activities, we do however not find any evidence that personal beliefs
about responsibilities are endogenous to car use (i.e. the univariate
model is preferred), and for respondents always using car for discre-
tionary purposes, such beliefs do not seem to affect car use at all. This
difference between different travel purposes is interesting. One possible
explanation can be that maintenance activities are generally more reg-
ular and frequent (e.g., grocery shopping) than discretionary activities
(e.g., social activities), and thus that travels for these purposes becomes
more of a routine, more similar to the decision on how to commute,
which may be determined by previous reflections regarding costs, con-
venience but also environmental impacts, resulting in a regular use of a
specific transport mode. As travels for discretionary activities are not
only more diverse, they are also more important for personal wellbeing
and associated with positive emotions to a higher extent than travels for maintenance purposes. As a consequence of heterogeneity and perceived
importance of the discretionary leisure activities, each associated travel
may be less reflected upon, for instance regarding its environmental
impacts. This result may thus be in line with the claims of previous
research, that the discretionary travels are likely more difficult to un-
derstand and change (Holden and Linnerud, 2011; Zhu and Fan, 2018).
Regarding the importance of the habit of car use when commuting,
we find that people who regularly commute by car are more likely to use
the car also for leisure purposes which is also consistent with previous
findings (Bamberg et al., 2003; Eriksson et al., 2008; Pedersen et al.,
2012). This suggests that the results of measures aimed at reducing
unsustainable commuting patterns may spill over also when travelling to
leisure activities.
It is not surprising that respondents in metropolitan Stockholm are
least prone to car use, nor that car use is more frequent in the rural
municipalities. Although we have analysed travel behaviour in a limited
number of cases, it is likely that many small rural municipalities in
Sweden (and in other countries) share similar conditions. The transition
to fossil-free transports in theses rural cities is more challenging since
alternatives to car are limited and distances generally longer. Thus, in
rural municipalities, as well as in sparsely populated areas in general,
cars will likely be an important transport option also in the future, and
therefore, support to developments of fossil-free fuels and electrification
also in sparsely populated areas are necessary. Our results do however
not indicate any differences in the probability to acknowledge a personal
responsibility depending on type of municipality or residential area.
This indicates that more frequent car use in rural and sparsely populated
areas cannot be explained by differences in perceptions about personal
responsibilities to contribute to sustainable transports, rather it can be
explained by the different conditions for transport in these areas.
We do not find any direct gender effect on car use, while other
studies have found that women drive less frequent for all purposes
except for child-related trips (Ramos et al., 2020). Results indicate
however an indirect gender effect, via perceptions about personal re-
sponsibility to contribute to a sustainable transport sector. Women are
more likely to acknowledge this responsibility, as are people concerned
about climate change and those with people close expecting them to act
more sustainably when travelling. One limitation with this study is
however that our sample includes more women and educated in-
dividuals compared to the populations from which they are drawn. As a
result of this overrepresentation, it is possible that these results over-
estimate the extent to which people acknowledge a personal re-
sponsibility for sustainable transports.
A general result is that there are differences between transport to
maintenance and discretionary activities, especially we find that a per-
sonal responsibility to contribute to a sustainable transport sector is
endogenous to, and has a large impact on, car use to maintenance ac-
tivities. We also find that most of the variation in car use for discre-
tionary purposes is explained by other factors than the ones included
here. This is likely because discretionary purposes for travel is even
more heterogenous, and therefore difficult to explain. Our findings are
generally consistent with the findings in the qualitative study of
Str¨omblad et al. (2022), on car use for leisure purposes in a mid-sized
urban city in Sweden. We recommend more research, using mixed
methods, so as to generate both a deep understanding and generalisable
knowledge of the factors that are important for car use for these het-
erogeneous leisure travels, especially those with a discretionary pur-
pose. Our findings indicate that it is important to break car commuting
habits to achieve a more sustainable transport behaviour also when
travelling during leisure. In addition, activities aimed to increase the
potential for active transport modes (walking and cycling) when
commuting in municipalities with less availability and potential for
public transport are important for decreasing car use also during leisure.
Thus, municipal planning and policies aimed at building societies with
shorter distances to all types of activities, especially those for discre-
tionary purposes, are therefore recommended.
